Add Benoit's re commit dbt devblog (#1786)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/blog/2022-07-26-pre-commit-dbt.md

On the other hand, pre-commit-dbt defines dbt specific tests and actions (called [hooks](https://github.com/offbi/pre-commit-dbt/blob/main/HOOKS.md)) for the [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) framework.

There are currently over 20 tests that have been created but here 2 examples that we will leverage:

- check-model-has-tests: Check the model has a number of tests.
- check-model-has-properties-file: Check the model has a properties file (also called schema file).

## Implementing pre-commit-dbt & adding tests

Let’s take the example of a project with more than 300 models. Dozens of people have committed to the project, a PR review process is in place, but sometimes, with multiple models in the same PR, tracking if tests have been added or not is not easy and we know that not all models are tested today even if they should.

To remediate this let’s follow those 4 steps:

![Flow graph that describes the steps in defining a strategy for implementing this package on a dbt project with more than 300 models.](/img/blog/2022-07-26-pre-commit-dbt/define-strategy.png)

### 1. Define our rules and create a pre-commit config file

> pre-commit-dbt provides a range of tests that can be run on the models of our dbt project. In the case of a project which has existed for some time and which might not be following entirely best practices, I would recommend selecting a small subset of tests, fixing the project and adding more tests later on.

Reviewer: Optional wording suggestion: flip-flop these words:
```suggestion
pre-commit-dbt provides a range of tests that can be run on the models of our dbt project. In the case of a project which has existed for some time and which might not be entirely following best practices, I would recommend selecting a small subset of tests, fixing the project and adding more tests later on.
```

    files: ^models/
```

A few notes about this file:
- We start with a dbt-docs-generate to ensure that the command “dbt docs generate” is run before checking our models. This is required because pre-commit-dbt reads from the artifacts `catalog.json` and `manifest.json` and those files can be generated by generating the documentation
- The `files` argument is a regular expression. `^models/` is going to apply the test to all our models whose path starts with “models”, i.e. all the models of our project. If we wanted to run the test only for the models in the mart folder, we could write `^models/mart` . There are a few handy tools online to define and test regular expressions; one of them is https://regex101.com/
- We could also provide values for the parameter `exclude` if we wanted to exclude specific files or folders
- We could have added a parameter to the hook `check-model-has-tests` to mention how many tests each model is supposed to have (see [here](https://github.com/offbi/pre-commit-dbt/blob/main/HOOKS.md#check-model-has-tests))

Now that we have defined our configuration file, the next step will depend on whether we are using dbt via dbt Cloud or dbt Core via the CLI.

> If we are using dbt Cloud, let’s jump to step 4, where we will set up pre-commit-dbt as part of the CI process, otherwise, with dbt Core we can go to step 2.

Reviewer: Maybe hyperlink like this to make it easier to "jump to step 4"?
```suggestion
If we are using dbt Cloud, let’s jump to [step 4](#4-make-it-part-of-the-periodic-checks), where we will set up pre-commit-dbt as part of the CI process, otherwise, with dbt Core we can go to step 2.
```

### 2. Understand the scope of the changes required

With our configuration file created, we can now set up our computer to do some checks locally.

#### Activating a Python virtual environment

If we are using dbt in a Python virtual environment, let’s activate this environment. If not, we should really create a Python virtual environment ([more info here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html)) and activate it before installing pre-commit.

> We could technically skip this step but might then end up getting issues on our computer with different Python packages conflicting with each other.

Reviewer: 🤩

#### Installing and running pre-commit

> Once in the Python virtual environment, installing `pre-commit` is as straightforward as running `pip install pre-commit`.

Reviewer: Would you consider the following verbosity à la https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/cli/pip_install/ ?

Same suggestion for any location with a bare `pip install [...]` 
```suggestion
Once in the Python virtual environment, installing `pre-commit` is as straightforward as running `python -m pip install pre-commit`.
```

Reviewer 2: I am personally not doing it 😁 but I am happy to update the instructions to replace `pip` by `python -m pip`

Reviewer: In case you haven't seen any explanations _why_ `python -m pip` is the recommended command:
- Longer:[ Why you should use `python -m pip`](https://snarky.ca/why-you-should-use-python-m-pip/)
- Shorter:[ Use 'python -m pip' Everywhere](https://adamj.eu/tech/2020/02/25/use-python-m-pip-everywhere/)

A normal next step after installing pre-commit is to run a `pre-commit install` to install the git hooks and run tests automatically, but in our case, let’s wait a bit! We will cover this in step 4.

Instead, we can do a `pre-commit run --all-files`, which will run all the tests defined in our configuration file on all the files in our dbt project.

> ![Image of an output in the Terminal after running the above commands](/img/blog/2022-07-26-pre-commit-dbt/install-pre-commit.png)

Reviewer: Why did the [asciinema](https://asciinema.org/) get dropped? It's nice to see the commands in action. Even cooler once people know that they can copy-n-paste from it!

https://asciinema.org/a/lTmefht77ZEr6kmP7DymaxjRF

In my case, I can see that my model called `customers.sql` has not been added to any YAML file and has no test defined.

> In the case of a large project, the number of issues might be much bigger. If we use zsh as our shell, wildcard expansion can be used and we could run `pre-commit run –files models/mart/*` if we wanted to run all the checks only in the models stored under mart.

Reviewer: Don't you love how programs automatically turn our `--` into `–`?!

```suggestion
In the case of a large project, the number of issues might be much bigger. If we use zsh as our shell, wildcard expansion can be used and we could run `pre-commit run --files models/mart/*` if we wanted to run all the checks only in the models stored under mart.
```

### 3. Decide what needs to be fixed immediately

Once we have the list of models that either don’t exist in the YAML files or that don’t have any test defined, we can decide if we want to fix all of them at once or not.

What we will see in step 4 is that even if not all models are fixed at once, the CI step and the git hooks can lead to better project hygiene, forcing every model that is being modified to be tested.

In my example above, with just one model to fix, it is easy to create a PR with the changes, but if hundreds of models show up, you might decide to only fix the most important ones at first (your mart for example) and fix the other ones later on.

A great tool to update tests and descriptions for your models through a Web UI rather than updating dozens of YAML files is [tangata](https://github.com/ciejer/tangata_local), created by Chris Jenkins. You can watch Chris’s presentation at Coalesce [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9gFUmKyqe3w). 

Adding tests and descriptions can be done through a web browser and YAML files are automatically generated and updated in the background. We just need to commit and raise a PR!

> ![image of a dbt model documentation and description UI](/img/blog/2022-07-26-pre-commit-dbt/customers-model.png)

Reviewer: I hadn't heard of tangata before -- cool idea and it was fun to see the demo during the Coalesce video!

Unfortunately for me, it didn't install correctly for me out-of-the-box.

I did manage to get it installed by installing all of the following:
```
tangata
# needed to install and use tangata (see https://itsmycode.com/importerror-cannot-import-name-json-from-itsdangerous/)
itsdangerous==2.0.1
# needed to install and use tangata (see https://github.com/mjmeijer/donald_2021/issues/4)
werkzeug==2.0.3
# needed to install and use tangata
ruamel.yaml
```

But once I did get it installed and launched, it wasn't able to update my local files correctly. I didn't troubleshoot further from there.

So I'd cut out this entire section until the maintainer releases a new version 😢 

```suggestion
A great tool to update tests and descriptions for your models through a Web UI rather than updating dozens of YAML files is [tangata](https://github.com/ciejer/tangata_local), created by Chris Jenkins. You can watch Chris’s presentation at Coalesce [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9gFUmKyqe3w). 

Adding tests and descriptions can be done through a web browser and YAML files are automatically generated and updated in the background. We just need to commit and raise a PR!

![image of a dbt model documentation and description UI](/img/blog/2022-07-26-pre-commit-dbt/customers-model.png)
```

Reviewer 2: I will remove the part about tangata from the code. Thanks for checking it!

### 4. Make it part of the periodic checks
The last step of our flow is to make those pre-commit checks part of the day-to-day activities, running on the dbt models that are newly created or modified. That way, even if we don’t fix all our models at once, if they get modified at some points, tests will need to be added for the PR to be merged.

Adding periodic pre-commit checks can be done in 2 different ways, through CI (Continuous Integration) actions, or as git hooks when running dbt locally

#### a) Adding pre-commit-dbt to the CI flow (works for dbt Cloud and dbt CLI users)

The example below will assume GitHub actions as the CI engine but similar behavior could be achieved in any other CI tool.

As described before, we need to run a `dbt docs generate` in order to create updated JSON artifacts used in the pre-commit hooks.

> For that reason, we will need our CI step to execute this command, which will require setting up a `profiles.yml` file providing dbt the information to connect to the DW. Profiles files will be different for each data warehouse ([example here](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/warehouse-profiles/snowflake-profile)).

Reviewer: I'm not sure what our company suggested words, phrases, and acronyms are. I think I saw Drew explicitly suggest using the phrase "data warehouse" over alternatives for Callum's metrics post.
```suggestion
For that reason, we will need our CI step to execute this command, which will require setting up a `profiles.yml` file providing dbt the information to connect to the data warehouse. Profiles files will be different for each data warehouse ([example here](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/warehouse-profiles/snowflake-profile)).
```

In our case, let’s create a file called `profiles.yml` at the root of our dbt project, with the following information:

```yaml
​​jaffle_shop:
  target: ci
  outputs:
    ci:
      type: postgres
      host: <your_host>
      user: <user>
      password: "{{ env_var('DB_PASSWORD') }}"
      port: 5432
      dbname: <database>
      schema: ci
      threads: 4
```

We don’t want to save the password of our user in a clear text file. For that purpose, we use the ability to read it from an environment variable. The next step is to save the value of our password as a secret in GitHub. In our GitHub repository, under Settings > Security > Secrets > Action, let’s create a secret called DB_PASSWORD to store our sensitive password.

> Finally, we can create a new YAML file to define our GitHub action. The name is not important but this file must be saved  under the folders `.github/workflows/` (create those if they don’t exist yet)

Reviewer: It would be awesome if you could suggest a default file name for those of us that are unimaginative and/or lazy (me! 🙋).
```suggestion
Finally, we can create a new YAML file to define our GitHub action. e.g. `.github/workflows/pre_commit_checks.yml` The name is not important but this file must be saved  under the folders `.github/workflows/` (create those if they don’t exist yet)
```

- Mention that this action and all the steps should be run for every PR to main
- Retrieve the code from our PR
- Install dbt and pre-commit
- Identify the files modified in our PR and format them as a list of models separated by spaces
- Execute a `pre-commit run --files` on the models we just modified or created

Once we push those changes to our repo to a custom branch and create a PR to main, we see the following:

The GitHub action is running:

![Screenshot of a GitHub action executing on a PR that is running the pre-commit-check test](/img/blog/2022-07-26-pre-commit-dbt/testing-running.png)

The step fails because I missed some tests and it tells me what model is failing:

![Screenshot of the errors logs for the failed pre-commit-check test on the PR shown previously](/img/blog/2022-07-26-pre-commit-dbt/error-logs.png)

The result of the check is also shown in the PR directly:

![Screenshot of the failed test shown directly in the PR "checks" interface](/img/blog/2022-07-26-pre-commit-dbt/checks-failed.png)

With that information, I could now go back to dbt, document my model customers and push those new changes to my repo for another check to be performed.

> This action step can be defined in GitHub as being just here to inform or we could setup rules preventing any change to be merged in case the GitHub action fails.

Reviewer: I had to re-read this sentence a few times to understand it.

Maybe the following would be easier to understand?
```suggestion
We could setup rules that preventing any change to be merged if the GitHub action fails. Alternatively, this action step can be defined as merely informational. 
```

Reviewer 2: Much better!

#### b) Installing the pre-commit git hooks (for dbt CLI users)

If we develop locally with the dbt CLI, we could also execute `pre-commit install` to install the git hooks. What it means then is that every time we want to commit code in git, the pre-commit hooks will run and will prevent us from committing if any step fails.

> If we want to commit code without performing all the steps of the pre-hook we could use the environment variable SKIP or the git flag `--no-verify` as described in the documentation. (e.g. we might want to skip the auto `dbt docs generate` locally to prevent it from running at every commit and rely on running it manually from time to time) 

Reviewer: Maybe an explicit link to the part of the documentation that explains `SKIP` and `--no-verify` flag?

Reviewer 2: Will do! Thanks for the feedback

- Having the hooks set up locally ensures that all our models follow our conventions even before pushing them to our repo, ensuring that the CI step will pass correctly.
- And the GitHub action as CI test is a great safeguard for people using the dbt Cloud IDE or local developers who either have not installed the hooks or tried to push changes with the `--no-verify` flag

![A meme that reads "Why not both?"](/img/blog/2022-07-26-pre-commit-dbt/why-not-both-meme.png)

## Taking this solution further

We now have a process to ensure that the rules we are setting around testing required in our dbt models are enforced through automated steps.

What next? Going back to the diagram at the beginning of this post, we can now think of new rules we want to automate and modify our pre-commit file and GitHub actions to increase the quality of our dbt project. 

It is important though to keep in mind a good balance between setting enough rules and automation to ensure a project of good quality and setting too many of them, taking time from more value-added work and potentially slowing down the overall analytics development process.

> ![A diagram that adds additional steps to the original diagram shown in the beginning of the article. This solution includes a cyclical step for continuously adding new rules and leveraging a SQL linter.](/img/blog/2022-07-26-pre-commit-dbt/next-strategy.png)

Reviewer: You are a master at making compelling images, and WAY better at this than me.

Maybe something like this to highlight which steps are already covered and where they should focus next?
<img width="759" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/44704949/181831770-cf1a010c-4570-423c-bc29-3320f83995cf.png">

Reviewer 2: I will check it tomorrow. Thanks for the suggestion!

Reviewer 2: Thanks @dbeatty10 
I followed what you suggested and just used the same style for the diagram. I don't know how to update the image though. Could you help?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8754100/182317094-469575ec-c41b-47c8-aada-5922e2fdd13f.png)

Author: I can get that image updated for you! I'll comment here when I've committed the change

Author: Okay, the new image should be reflected in the content now!

Reviewer: Looks awesome @b-per ! Thanks @johnblust !

Author: Cool, if we feel like this is good to go, can we get approval @dbeatty10?

- We could for example add SQLFluff as a SQL Linter to show us what SQL code is not following the rules that we have defined
- Or we could add more pre-commit-dbt checks like check-model-name-contract to make sure that all our model names are following the correct naming convention
- Or we could add a check on our YAML files to verify if they are all indented correctly

> If you have any questions about this process or want to share how you are using pre-commit and CI to increase the quality of your dbt project, feel free to jump in dbt Slack and post in #i-made-this or  #dbt-deployment-and-orchestration !

Reviewer: Can you hyperlink to the Slack channels from the web, or no? If so, I love clickable links 😄

Reviewer 2: I will give it a go!

With that information, I could now go back to dbt, document my model customers and push those new changes to my repo for another check to be performed.

> We could setup rules that preventing any change to be merged if the GitHub action fails. Alternatively, this action step can be defined as merely informational. 

Reviewer: Another slight update I missed before:
```suggestion
We could set up rules that prevent any change to be merged if the GitHub action fails. Alternatively, this action step can be defined as merely informational. 
```
